---
title: 'Why I Chose Data Science Over Medicine'
date: 2022-10-11
permalink: /posts/2022/10/WhyDataScience/
tags:
  - DataScience
  - MedicalSchool
  - Programming
---

### Why leave Medicine?
I spent five years in undergrad plus two years padding my resume merely to walk through the door of a medical school. Then, after completing my first year, I left. It was a difficult decision, but one I grow more confident in each passing day. \
I went into medicine for the supposed right reasons: I wanted to help people, I enjoyed the sciences, and I felt responsible for making the world a better place. I left because several aspects of medicine and medical school, which I was woefully ignorant of before starting, directly contradict those reasons. Medical school itself was less about understanding the sciences and applying that knowledge to understanding disease than it was about bureaucracy and rote memorizing diagnoses and treatments. I realized that physicians are not important leaders enacting change in their communities, but cogs in the machine of a seemingly hopelessly broken healthcare system. There are many more specifics, but the short of it is that I didn't feel I could make any meaningful contribution to the world as a physician, and thus could not justify the long and demanding training and career of medicine.

### Why choose data science?
I originally picked up programming as a hobby during my gap year applying to medical school. I thought knowing how to code might unlock some doors for me in the future, but I did not predict that I would fall in love with it. I taught myself to program by reading *"Automate the Boring Stuff with Python"*. After just getting a grasp of python, my team at Project Malawi met to discuss our research. Our statistician was taking much too long to return our results, and, having taken college-level applied statistics and studying for the MCAT, I felt like I could use my new python skills to get us moving. I found out about pandas, SciPy, and Matplotlib, and got to work. My first script was a complete mess, but I was able to get all of the stats and visualizations we needed to begin writing our manuscript, and I learned that I liked playing with data. \
I put down pandas and focused on game design for a few months until starting medical school. Within the first week, I saw that a research lab was looking for a medical student with coding skills, and I knew my work had paid off. I landed a position in the lab of Dr. Granatosky studying the anatomy of climbing animals and evolutionary anatomy. It was here that I realized I had a knack for programming and data science, as I helped create visualizations, web scrape, clean data, and play around with robotics. As the year went on, I realized that I enjoyed even the most mundane programming tasks from my lab, and dreaded aspects of medical school that many of my peers seemed to enjoy. I wanted to learn about machine learning and algorithms, not memorize which mutation caused chronic myelogenous leukemia. Once I learned that a career in data science was attainable for me, I decided to go for it, and I haven't really looked back.
